homework3/written-exercises.md, before:

# CMSI 386 - HW 3

1. (5 pts) Given the C++ declaration:

   ```c++
   struct {
     int n;   // 4bytes -> 4 x 8 bits
     char c;  // 1byte  -> 8 bits
   } A[10][10];
   ```

   On your machine, find the address of `A[0][0]`  and `A[3][7]` . Explain why these values are what you found them to be.

   output:

   ```sh
   0x1043040a0
   0x1043041c8
   ```

   These values correspond to 4365238432 and 4365238728 in decimal respectively, which are separated by 296 bits.

   $(3 * 10  + 7) * 8 = 296$.

   Each entry in the array takes up 8 bytes. Even though a struct that takes up 5 bytes is stored in each position, data alignment means putting the data at a memory address equal to some multiple of the word size, which increases the system's performance due to the way the CPU handles memory. To access the location of the pointer in the 3,7 location, because c++ stores the elements of an array sequentially, this is equivalent to the array location $3*10+7$ passed the first entry at A\[0][0] corresponding to memory address  $(3 * 10  + 7) * 8 + A[0][0]$.

2. (5 pts) Explain the meaning of the following C++ declarations:

   ```c++
   double *a[n]; //1
   double (*b)[n]; //2
   double (*c[n])(); //3
   double (*d())[n]; //4
   ```
   1. An array of n pointers to memory locations storing doubles
   2. A pointer to an array containing n doubles
   3. An array containing n pointers to memory locations storying functions with return type double
   4. A function that returns a pointer to an array containing n doubles

3. Consider the following declaration in C++:

   ```c++
   double (*f(double (*)(double, double[]), double)) (double, ...);
   ```

   Describe rigorously, in English, the type of f.

   `f` is a function that returns a pointer to `double (double, ...)`, which is a function that takes a `double` followed by `varargs` and returns a `double`.

   The parameters of `f` are `(double (*) (double, double[]), double)`, a pointer to a function that takes a `double` and an array `double[]` and returns `double` as the first argument, and a `double` as the second argument.

4. What happens when we “redefine” a field in a C++ subclass? For example, suppose we have:

   ```c++
   class Base {
   public:
     int a;
     std::string b;
   };

   class Derived: public Base {
   public:
     float c;
     int b;
   };
   ```

   Does the representation of a Derived object contain one b field or two? If two, are both accessible, or only one? Under what circumstances? Tell the story of how things are.

   The derived object has one `b` field of type `int`, however it has access to its parents `b` field trough the syntax `Parent::field`, in this case `Base::b` . This is possible in this case because Base's b field is public.

5. What does the following C++ program output?

   ```c++
   #include <iostream>
   int x = 2;
   void f() { std::cout << x << '\n'; }
   void g() {
     int x = 5;
     f();
     std::cout << x << '\n'; }
   int main() {
     g();
     std::cout << x << '\n';
   }
   ```

   ##### Output:

   ```sh
   2
   5
   2
   ```

   Verify that the answer you obtained is the same that would be inferred from apply the rules of static scoping. If C++ used dynamic scoping, what would the output have been?

   ##### Statically Scoped

   A *block* defines a new scope. Variables can be declared in that scope, and aren't visible from the outside. However, variables outside the scope -- in enclosing scopes -- are visible unless they are overridden.

   ##### Dynamically Scoped

   We first look for a local definition of a variable. If it isn't found, we look up the calling stack for a definition. The output would be:

   ```sh
   5
   5
   2
   ```

6. Suppose you were asked to write a function to scramble (shuffle) a given array, in a mutable fashion. Give the function signature for a shuffle function for (a) a raw array, and (b) a std::array.

   ```c++
   void shuffle (int& arr[]) {
    ...
   }

   template<std::size_t SIZE>
   void shuffle(std::array<int, SIZE>& arr) {
   ...
   }
   ```

   ​

Commit message:

change wording for padding problem

homework3/written-exercises.md, after:

# CMSI 386 - HW 3

1. (5 pts) Given the C++ declaration:

   ```c++
   struct {
     int n;   // 4bytes -> 4 x 8 bits
     char c;  // 1byte  -> 8 bits
   } A[10][10];
   ```

   On your machine, find the address of `A[0][0]`  and `A[3][7]` . Explain why these values are what you found them to be.

   output:

   ```sh
   0x1043040a0
   0x1043041c8
   ```

   These values correspond to 4365238432 and 4365238728 in decimal respectively, which are separated by 296 bits.

   $(3 * 10  + 7) * 8 = 296$.

   Each entry in the array takes up 8 bytes. Even though a struct that takes up 5 bytes is stored in each position, data alignment or *padding*, which increases the system's performance due to the way the CPU handles memory. struct-padding is done differently by different compilers. To access the location of the struct in the 3,7 location, because c++ stores the elements of an array sequentially, this is equivalent to the array location $3*10+7$ passed the first entry at A\[0][0] corresponding to memory address  $(3 * 10  + 7) * 8 + A[0][0]$.

2. (5 pts) Explain the meaning of the following C++ declarations:

   ```c++
   double *a[n]; //1
   double (*b)[n]; //2
   double (*c[n])(); //3
   double (*d())[n]; //4
   ```
   1. An array of n pointers to memory locations storing doubles
   2. A pointer to an array containing n doubles
   3. An array containing n pointers to memory locations storying functions with return type double
   4. A function that returns a pointer to an array containing n doubles

3. Consider the following declaration in C++:

   ```c++
   double (*f(double (*)(double, double[]), double)) (double, ...);
   ```

   Describe rigorously, in English, the type of f.

   `f` is a function that returns a pointer to `double (double, ...)`, which is a function that takes a `double` followed by `varargs` and returns a `double`.

   The parameters of `f` are `(double (*) (double, double[]), double)`, a pointer to a function that takes a `double` and an array `double[]` and returns `double` as the first argument, and a `double` as the second argument.

4. What happens when we “redefine” a field in a C++ subclass? For example, suppose we have:

   ```c++
   class Base {
   public:
     int a;
     std::string b;
   };

   class Derived: public Base {
   public:
     float c;
     int b;
   };
   ```

   Does the representation of a Derived object contain one b field or two? If two, are both accessible, or only one? Under what circumstances? Tell the story of how things are.

   The derived object has one `b` field of type `int`, however it has access to its parents `b` field trough the syntax `Parent::field`, in this case `Base::b` . This is possible in this case because Base's b field is public.

5. What does the following C++ program output?

   ```c++
   #include <iostream>
   int x = 2;
   void f() { std::cout << x << '\n'; }
   void g() {
     int x = 5;
     f();
     std::cout << x << '\n'; }
   int main() {
     g();
     std::cout << x << '\n';
   }
   ```

   ##### Output:

   ```sh
   2
   5
   2
   ```

   Verify that the answer you obtained is the same that would be inferred from apply the rules of static scoping. If C++ used dynamic scoping, what would the output have been?

   ##### Statically Scoped

   A *block* defines a new scope. Variables can be declared in that scope, and aren't visible from the outside. However, variables outside the scope -- in enclosing scopes -- are visible unless they are overridden.

   ##### Dynamically Scoped

   We first look for a local definition of a variable. If it isn't found, we look up the calling stack for a definition. The output would be:

   ```sh
   5
   5
   2
   ```

6. Suppose you were asked to write a function to scramble (shuffle) a given array, in a mutable fashion. Give the function signature for a shuffle function for (a) a raw array, and (b) a std::array.

   ```c++
   void shuffle (int& arr[]) {
    ...
   }

   template<std::size_t SIZE>
   void shuffle(std::array<int, SIZE>& arr) {
   ...
   }
   ```

   ​
